content/posts/making-my-home-server.md, before:

+++
title = "Making My Home Server"
date = 2024-01-01
tags = ["server", "tech"]
keywords = ["", ""]
description = ""
readingTime = true
draft = true
toc = false
+++

In 2023, I got an itch to see what it would be like to have Linux installed on a bare metal PC, and I had the perfect situation for this as I had my old PC just laying around collecting dust after I had to decommision it due to HDD failure. Over the course of the year, this turned more into a home lab as I kept adding more services and hardware into the mix.

## tldr: Current Setup

### Main Server - **inari**

[Name Origin](https://mythopedia.com/topics/inari): Sounded cool

- CPU: Intel i5-12400
- RAM: 32GB 3200MHz
- Boot Drive: Acer Predator GM7000 500GB NVME SSD
- Server Storage: 2x 14TB WD Red Plus HDD
- Case: Jonsbo N2

### Mini Server - **chibi**

[Name Origin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chibi_(style)): It's a *Mini* PC

- Brand: Beelink Mini PC
- CPU: Intel N100
- RAM: 16GB
- Boot Drive: OEM 512 GB NVME SSD
- Extra Storage: Samsung 860 Evo 500GB SATA SSD

## The Beginning (January 2023)

I dusted off my old PC([yanai](#main-server---yanai)) and loaded [Pop!\_OS](https://pop.system76.com/) on it.
At first, I just installed the common Desktop Apps that one would use and familiarized my self with Pop!\_OS.
It was my first real experience using a Linux Desktop, I'll say that most stuff worked as expected out of the box.

But, I soon got bored and stopped using it.

## Turning it into a my Home Server (February 2023)

Around February 2023, my friends were getting back into [Valheim](https://www.valheimgame.com/) and at the time,
it was one of my friends hosting the server only when he was online.
This meant that everyone could only play whenever he could leave the server running on PC.
Obviously, this is rather annoying if you want to grind the game.

So, I told them that I could try hosting the server on my old PC that was just laying around.
I started looking around how I can host the Valheim server with Linux,
first method that popped up was the one using the [Steam](https://store.steampowered.com/) dedicated server for Valheim and running the `start_server.sh` script with a couple of flags to give it the world files.
This was a rather antiquated way of doing it because I had to keep a terminal window open with the script running (I didn't know about screen/tmux at the time).
I then started looking for ways to do it headless, which lead me to this [Valheim Docker Container](https://github.com/lloesche/valheim-server-docker).
I had some light experience using Docker, but nothing too in depth.
This was my first real dive into attempting to deploy a service using docker.
After mucking around, I was able to whip up a `docker-compose.yml` file that I could use.

```yml
version: "3.9"

services:
    valheim:
        image: ghcr.io/lloesche/valheim-server
        container_name: valheim
        cap_add:
            - sys_nice
        volumes:
            - $HOME/Shared/valheim/config:/config
            - $HOME/Shared/valheim/data/:/opt/valheim
        ports:
            - "2456-2457:2456-2457/udp"
        env_file:
            - $HOME/Shared/valheim/valheim.env
        restart: unless-stopped
        stop_grace_period: 2m
```

I ran `docker compose up -D` and the service was up and running.
I then had to open some ports on my router so my friends could access the server and it was smooth sailing from there on out.

## Adding more services (March 2023)

After a month or so of hosting the Valheim server, I started looking around to see what else I could do selfhost.
I stumbled upon [r/selfhosted](https://www.reddit.com/r/selfhosted/) like any other person would.
After looking around I ended up hosting the default media server stack of of the [Sonarr](https://sonarr.tv/), [Radarr](https://radarr.video/), [Jellyfin](https://jellyfin.org/), and [qBittorrent](https://www.qbittorrent.org/).

With this media stack, I was able to automate the downloads of Seasonal Linux ISOs I was following and get any older ones that piqued my interest.

I needed a way to remotely access this new media, so the easy choice was to use [Tailscale](https://tailscale.com/) even if it is not fully selfshosted, unless I use something like [Headscale](https://github.com/juanfont/headscale).

## Using Raspberry Pi Zero W to wake/sleep main server (August 2023)

Living in a place with the highest electricity prices in the US, I can't be running my beefy server the entire time.
The server idles at around 40 watts, meaning that running the server 24/7 at the current price of \$0.60/KWH, would cost around 18 per month.

So, I needed a way to remotely manage when the server should be on.
I had a Raspberry Pi Zero W laying around so i decided to put it to use, as I know they consume low power.
I quickly made two services, one for the server and one for the RPI.

The program running on the server, named `sugoi`, would just run a lightweight web server that listens for a specific command, that would put the server to sleep.

The program on the RPI, name `nemui`, would be a light webserver that either wakes up or sleeps the main server depending on the path that was queried.
To wake up the server, I enabled [Wake-on-LAN](https://todo) on the server, and from the RPI i would send the magic packet to the MAC address of the server, waking it up.
For sleeping, the RPI would run a command through SSH to make the server sleep, the command `systemctl suspend`.

After getting these services up and running, I could wake/sleep the server by just accessing the http endpoint running on the RPI.
This was quite helpful, as now the server only consumes around 1 W while sleeping, and I can turn it on when I want to watch something, or use one of the other services.
But, this meant that ALL my services are down when the server is asleep, which was annoying sometimes as I would like to access some of the ones that don't require strong compute and this leads to the next section.

## Distributing services to a lower power PC (November 2023)

Last year, I started hearing some buzz around Mini PCs, specifically ones that provide adequate compute and really good power consumption.
The primary one being the ones with the Intel N100 CPU, which comes with 4 cores and idle around 6 W, which is good enough for me run it 24/7 as it won't cost an arm and leg.
I snapped one up from with 16GB of RAM, and a 500GB SSD for around \$160 USD.

Around this time, I also started getting interested in [Nix](https://nixos.org/), which provides ways to create reproducible builds and environment, all done declaratively.
I loaded it up on this new mini PC to see what all the rage was about.

First, I started with the basic of just try to add packages declaratively, and so on. Then, branching into running and configuring programs and services using the Nix language.
Once I got familiarized with the basics, I started moving some of the services that I would like to keep online 24/7, like my dashboard, RSS feed, bookmark manager, and DNS server.
I declared these services using OCI Containers, with Docker under the hood, initially as that was the easiest way I found at the time to port them to the Nix way.
Over time, I started moving some of them to native Native NixOS services, which are more easliy configured and follow the Nix way of doing things.

## Moving Main Server to new PC(NixOS btw) (January 2024)

Later down the line I decided that I enjoyed declaring my services using Nix instead of running them on a mutable distro, like I was doing currently on my main server.
So, I took this opportunity to build a new PC that takes less space, supports more hard drives, and use more modern hardware with support for newer and more efficient hardware video decoding.

For the case I went with the [Jonsbo N2](https://www.jonsbo.com/en/products/N2White.html) case, do it supporting up to 5 drives with an easy way to mount them.
I went with an Intel i5-12400 for the CPU and 32 GB of RAM. This gives me some headroom to run a decent amount of services, and possibly down the line use it as a build server.


## Current Status (August 2024)

TODO

## Future Plans

TODO

## Out of Commission PCs

### Old Main Server - **yanai**

[Name Origin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yanai,_Yamaguchi): Sounded cool

- CPU: Intel i7-7700K
- RAM: 16GB 3200MHz
- Boot Drive: Samsung 960 Evo 256GB NVME SSD
- Server Storage: 2x 14TB WD Red Plus HDD

### DO VPS Server - **kumo**

[Name Origin](https://www.nihongomaster.com/japanese/dictionary/word/16254/kumo-%E9%9B%B2-%E3%81%8F%E3%82%82): It's a server on the cloud

- $6/mo Digital Ocean Basic Droplet

Commit message:

chore: move to new theme

content/posts/making-my-home-server.md, after:

+++
title = "Making My Home Server"
date = 2025-05-21
tags = ["server", "tech", "selfhosting"]
keywords = ["", ""]
description = ""
readingTime = true
draft = true
toc = true
+++

In 2023, I got an itch to see what it would be like to have Linux installed on a bare metal PC, and I had the perfect situation for this as I had my old PC just laying around collecting dust after I had to decommision it due to HDD failure. Over the course of the year, this turned more into a home lab as I kept adding more services and hardware into the mix.

## tldr: Current Setup

### Main Server - **inari**

[Name Origin](https://mythopedia.com/topics/inari): Sounded cool

- CPU: Intel i5-12400
- RAM: 32GB 3200MHz
- Boot Drive: Acer Predator GM7000 500GB NVME SSD
- Server Storage: 2x 14TB WD Red Plus HDD
- Case: Jonsbo N2

### Mini Server - **chibi**

[Name Origin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chibi_(style)): It's a *Mini* PC

- Brand: Beelink Mini PC
- CPU: Intel N100
- RAM: 16GB
- Boot Drive: OEM 512 GB NVME SSD
- Extra Storage: Samsung 860 Evo 500GB SATA SSD

## The Beginning (January 2023)

I dusted off my old PC([yanai](#main-server---yanai)) and loaded [Pop!\_OS](https://pop.system76.com/) on it.
At first, I just installed the common Desktop Apps that one would use and familiarized my self with Pop!\_OS.
It was my first real experience using a Linux Desktop, I'll say that most stuff worked as expected out of the box.

But, I soon got bored and stopped using it.

## Turning it into a my Home Server (February 2023)

Around February 2023, my friends were getting back into [Valheim](https://www.valheimgame.com/) and at the time,
it was one of my friends hosting the server only when he was online.
This meant that everyone could only play whenever he could leave the server running on PC.
Obviously, this is rather annoying if you want to grind the game.

So, I told them that I could try hosting the server on my old PC that was just laying around.
I started looking around how I can host the Valheim server with Linux,
first method that popped up was the one using the [Steam](https://store.steampowered.com/) dedicated server for Valheim and running the `start_server.sh` script with a couple of flags to give it the world files.
This was a rather antiquated way of doing it because I had to keep a terminal window open with the script running (I didn't know about screen/tmux at the time).
I then started looking for ways to do it headless, which lead me to this [Valheim Docker Container](https://github.com/lloesche/valheim-server-docker).
I had some light experience using Docker, but nothing too in depth.
This was my first real dive into attempting to deploy a service using docker.
After mucking around, I was able to whip up a `docker-compose.yml` file that I could use.

```yml
version: "3.9"

services:
    valheim:
        image: ghcr.io/lloesche/valheim-server
        container_name: valheim
        cap_add:
            - sys_nice
        volumes:
            - $HOME/Shared/valheim/config:/config
            - $HOME/Shared/valheim/data/:/opt/valheim
        ports:
            - "2456-2457:2456-2457/udp"
        env_file:
            - $HOME/Shared/valheim/valheim.env
        restart: unless-stopped
        stop_grace_period: 2m
```

I ran `docker compose up -D` and the service was up and running.
I then had to open some ports on my router so my friends could access the server and it was smooth sailing from there on out.

## Adding more services (March 2023)

After a month or so of hosting the Valheim server, I started looking around to see what else I could do selfhost.
I stumbled upon [r/selfhosted](https://www.reddit.com/r/selfhosted/) like any other person would.
After looking around I ended up hosting the default media server stack of of the [Sonarr](https://sonarr.tv/), [Radarr](https://radarr.video/), [Jellyfin](https://jellyfin.org/), and [qBittorrent](https://www.qbittorrent.org/).

With this media stack, I was able to automate the downloads of Seasonal Linux ISOs I was following and get any older ones that piqued my interest.

I needed a way to remotely access this new media, so the easy choice was to use [Tailscale](https://tailscale.com/) even if it is not fully selfshosted, unless I use something like [Headscale](https://github.com/juanfont/headscale).

## Using Raspberry Pi Zero W to wake/sleep main server (August 2023)

Living in a place with the highest electricity prices in the US, I can't be running my beefy server the entire time.
The server idles at around 40 watts, meaning that running the server 24/7 at the current price of \$0.60/KWH, would cost around 18 per month.

So, I needed a way to remotely manage when the server should be on.
I had a Raspberry Pi Zero W laying around so i decided to put it to use, as I know they consume low power.
I quickly made two services, one for the server and one for the RPI.

The program running on the server, named `sugoi`, would just run a lightweight web server that listens for a specific command, that would put the server to sleep.

The program on the RPI, name `nemui`, would be a light webserver that either wakes up or sleeps the main server depending on the path that was queried.
To wake up the server, I enabled [Wake-on-LAN](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wake-on-LAN) on the server, and from the RPI i would send the magic packet to the MAC address of the server, waking it up.
For sleeping, the RPI would run a command through SSH to make the server sleep, the command `systemctl suspend`.

After getting these services up and running, I could wake/sleep the server by just accessing the http endpoint running on the RPI.
This was quite helpful, as now the server only consumes around 1 W while sleeping, and I can turn it on when I want to watch something, or use one of the other services.
But, this meant that ALL my services are down when the server is asleep, which was annoying sometimes as I would like to access some of the ones that don't require strong compute and this leads to the next section.

## Distributing services to a lower power PC (November 2023)

Last year, I started hearing some buzz around Mini PCs, specifically ones that provide adequate compute and really good power consumption.
The primary one being the ones with the Intel N100 CPU, which comes with 4 cores and idle around 6 W, which is good enough for me run it 24/7 as it won't cost an arm and leg.
I snapped one up from with 16GB of RAM, and a 500GB SSD for around \$160 USD.

Around this time, I also started getting interested in [Nix](https://nixos.org/), which provides ways to create reproducible builds and environment, all done declaratively.
I loaded it up on this new mini PC to see what all the rage was about.

First, I started with the basic of just try to add packages declaratively, and so on. Then, branching into running and configuring programs and services using the Nix language.
Once I got familiarized with the basics, I started moving some of the services that I would like to keep online 24/7, like my dashboard, RSS feed, bookmark manager, and DNS server.
I declared these services using OCI Containers, with Docker under the hood, initially as that was the easiest way I found at the time to port them to the Nix way.
Over time, I started moving some of them to native Native NixOS services, which are more easliy configured and follow the Nix way of doing things.

## Switching to NixOS (January 2024)

Later down the line I decided that I enjoyed declaring my services using Nix instead of running them on a regular distro, like I was doing currently on my main server.
So, I took this opportunity to build a new PC that takes less space, supports more hard drives, and use more modern hardware with support for newer and more efficient hardware video decoding.

For the case I went with the [Jonsbo N2](https://www.jonsbo.com/en/products/N2White.html) case, do it supporting up to 5 drives with an easy way to mount them.
I went with an Intel i5-12400 for the CPU and 32 GB of RAM. This gives me some headroom to run a decent amount of services, and possibly down the line use it as a build server.
I moved the HDDs to this new PC and got to work.

For the initial move, I just ported the docker containers as OCI containers for simplicity's sake until I got more familiar with the NixOS ecosystem.

## Status Update (August 2024)

I started getting more accostumed to NixOS, now deploying native services and using some the secrets management flake utilities which allow me to keep everything in a single repository.
Also moving services that started as OCI containers to native NixOS services (jellyfin, sonarr, radarr, etc.).
Added couple new services like [AdGuardHome](https://github.com/AdguardTeam/AdGuardHome) for DNS blocking and [Caddy](https://caddyserver.com/) instead of Nginx Proxy Manager for reverse proxying my services.

## Current Status (June 2025)

TODO

## Future Plans

TODO

## Out of Commission PCs

### Old Main Server - **yanai**

[Name Origin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yanai,_Yamaguchi): Sounded cool

- CPU: Intel i7-7700K
- RAM: 16GB 3200MHz
- Boot Drive: Samsung 960 Evo 256GB NVME SSD
- Server Storage: 2x 14TB WD Red Plus HDD


### Digital Ocean VPS - **kumo**

[Name Origin](https://www.nihongomaster.com/japanese/dictionary/word/16254/kumo-%E9%9B%B2-%E3%81%8F%E3%82%82): It's a server on the cloud

- $6/mo Digital Ocean Basic Droplet
